

About the project:
Swept Off the Map is a seven-month investigation into the scope and scale of 
encampment sweeps in Berkeley, Richmond and Oakland. This map is one 
of five published pieces that comprise this investigation. The other 
pieces include: 


- Title: Governing Homelessness: Encampment Managemetn in 
Richmond, Berkeley, and Oakland
Subtitle: How three East Bay cities manage unsheltered homelessness, 
outlining local policies, laws, and practices, and how they play out
on the ground. 

- Title: No Place to Park
Subtitle: How the search for stability can make it difficult for vehicle dwellers 
to move forward

Title: Losing Patients
Subtitle: LifeLong Street Medicine doctors explain the health consequences
of encampment closures on their Patients

Title: 8th and Harrison Stays
Subtitle: A long-standing encampment community in West Berkeley lives under the 
constant threat of permanent closure
    




About the authors:

Cole Haddock and Maria Toldi are journalists and researchers whose collaborative work centers on homelessness, displacement, and community resilience in the Bay Area. Their partnership began in 2023 producing the documentary Unhoused and Unseen for San Quentin News, and has continued through ongoing collaborations with Street Spirit. Over the past three years, their work has centered on dignifying and respectful journalism, mutual aid, and collaborative storytelling.

Maria Toldi graduated from University of California, Berkeley in 2025, where she earned her degree in Interdisciplinary Research Studies with a minor in Political Economy. Her academic work has integrated sociology, public policy, ethnic studies, and psychology to critically examine structural inequality and systems of social control. 

Cole Haddock is a graduate of the Geography Department of the University of California, Berkeley and the Human Rights Center at UC Berkeley Law. He will work this summer as a daily news reporter for the Daily Sitka Sentinel in Alaska. 

The Judith Lee Stronach Prize

This project was fully funded by UC Berkeley’s Judith Lee Stronach Baccalaureate Prize, which supports intellectual and creative pursuits that heighten awareness of issues of social consciousness and contribute to the public good. 

Advisors

Alastair Boone 
Director of Street Spirit newspaper and KALW Beat Reporter
Alastair led the editorial oversight for Swept Off The Map. She provided project management, edited individual stories, provided a framework for ethical reporting and fact-checking, and offered subject matter expertise. 

Dr. Desiree Fields
UC Berkeley Geography Department Chair and Associate Professor 
Dr. Fields contributed editorial support and expert guidance on research methods and project management at every stage of the project.

Georgia von Minden
Adjunct Professor at University of San Francisco 
Georgia provided computer science guidance for Swept Off The Map. She taught proper data and code organization standards, as well as assisted with fact-checking. 

Community Partners:

Our community partners helped us become embedded in the Bay Area cities of Richmond, Berkeley, Oakland. This aided our education about the policies and practices that shape the region’s response to homelessness. 


SOS Richmond

SOS Richmond is a community-rooted nonprofit serving Richmond, CA, where unhoused and housed community members collaborate to address homelessness. They operate a wellness center and resource center to offer job support, food and clothing access, laundry services, and direct connections to essential county services. SOS Richmond also delivers hands-on encampment services, including mobile showers, trash pickup, portable toilets, and other supplies. Cole and Maria brought breakfast to the SOS Richmond warehouse nearly every week during their wellness center hours and talked about the Street Spirit newspaper with potential authors, vendors, and readers. 

Episcopal Church of the Good Shepherd

The Episcopal Church of the Good Shepherd is a historic congregation in West Berkeley, with a long and deeply rooted commitment to serving its surrounding community from hosting an early Black Panthers' breakfast program for schoolchildren to developing a prototype of the Head Start Program. Today, the church has an active food pantry and weekly food program. Since fall 2024, Cole and Maria have partnered with Good Shepherd for their food program, delivering 120 lunches weekly (more than 9,000 in total) to day laborers and encampment residents in the East Bay.

Art and Design

Website development and design
Elli Matejka

Logo design
Mesro Coles-El 


Special thanks to:


Wali Henderson — San Quentin News

Yesica Prado — El Tecolote

Paul Kealoha-Blake — Consider the Homeless

Kelsey Hubbard — Oakland Revealed

Brigitte Nicoletti — East Bay Community Law

Osha Neumann — East Bay Community Law

Jessica Lin-Tupas — U.C. Berkeley

Dr. Alexa Koenig — Human Rights Center

Japjot Sethi — Free Meals on Wheels and Good Karma Water

Bradley Penner — Street Spirit 


