Map Methodologies

Terminology: postings vs. operations vs. encampment sweeps

Often, people refer to encampment closures as sweeps. They also might say that the city is sweeping, or somebody is getting swept. 

We struggled to align these words with clear definitions for the purposes of our project. If two tents next to each other are removed on the same day, is that one sweep or two? If a large community comprised of many tents and vehicles is removed, is that one large sweep, or many small ones? How can you compare a sweep that affects many people to one where only one person is forced to move?  Further, there are a range of sweeps not represented in this dataset at all — for example,  move-along orders, or sweeps performed by CalTrans or private agencies (like railroad companies or conservation commissions). 

For these problems, and more, Street Spirit elected instead to utilize the words closures, postings and city operations.

Our definition of a closure aligns with what is laid out in Oakland’s Encampment Abatement Policy: When officials from the city’s Encampment Management Abatement Team physically shut down and clear an encampment site. These workers force residents to relocate, tow vehicles, and dispose of tents and belongings. The city tracks how many closures they’ve conducted based off of how many separate flyers they’ve printed and posted. 

The City of Oakland is mandated to notify residents before it conducts a closure. Before the closure, workers will print out flyers to tape around the designated area.These are generally called “pink slips,” “pink tags,” or “red tags” (red tags typically refer to RVs or cars at risk of getting towed). Flyers get taped to tents, RVs, vehicles, lightpoles and other structures in the area. They announce that public works officials will arrive to close a specific area on a specific date. The specific area is generally not larger than a single block or a single park. 

Common closure locations include:
‘Mosswood Park’
‘Solano Way between 14th Ave and 15th Ave’
‘Solano Way between 15th Ave and 16th Ave’

In the City’s dataset, each new closure record corresponds to a new location, even if they are adjoining streets and the actions took place on the same day. The number is therefore reflective of how many different flyers the City printed and posted, rather than how many separate closures were necessarily conducted.  For this reason, we refer to the city’s records as postings. There are 2,2001 postings in the City of Oakland’s dataset, which we have aggregated into a total of 791 continuous operations, the majority of them closures. 

Without context, using the number  2,2001 to reflect the total number of “sweeps” or closures that have been conducted since 2021 misconstrues the on-the-ground reality of encampment closures.

Our analysis groups postings together to form continuous operations when they are geographically proximate to each other and occur within a continuous time frame.

Frequently, the city will post notices on several blocks at a time, sometimes stretching an entire neighborhood. The EMAT team will progress through the posted area closing encampments. If an unhoused person relocates after their encampment is closed to another nearby area that has been flyered simultaneously, they can be relocated several times. We assume that from the City’s perspective, an operation is not done until all of the posted blocks are closed.

Many large operations span several weeks. In this case, a location might reoccur in the dataset repeatedly in a short time frame, as they issue new flyers for every week. Our definition of a continuous time frame excludes breaks for weekends and holidays. 

Here are the seven locations that make up operation 35_1. All of their associated postings were Full Closures with the same date range: October 20, 2025 through October 24th, 2025. All of these are continuous blocks. 

3rd St between Center St and Chester St
3rd St between Chester St and Henry St
3rd St between Henry St & Lewis St
3rd St between Lewis St & Peralta St
Peralta St between 3rd St & 5th St
Peralta St between 5th St and 7th St
South Prescott Park and Dog Park

There are a total of five types of encampment interventions described in the EMP that range from "Health & Hygiene" — routine sanitation and trash collection, which occur throughout the city, to “Deep Cleanings” — temporary displacement while an area is cleaned. There are also two types of closure: “Partial Closures” permanently close one section of an encampment while residents largely remain. “Full Closures” describe a complete and permanent closure, where re-encampment is prohibited (and can result in fines or jailtime).  There are also “Emergency Closures,” which are the same as Full Closures, but can happen without the same noticing procedures.  Almost 80% of records in this dataset represent Full Closures. Out of 1280 postings since June 2024, there have only been eighteen that were not Full Closures. Our data is organized into “Full Closure”, “Deep Cleaning” and “Other.”

We have worked to analyze this dataset accurately based on its own lexicon of terms and activities. However, it is important to note the ways in which it does not capture the full picture of encampment management in Oakland.

What the dataset doesn’t capture

We don’t see:
How many people live in the encampments being closed
How many people are offered shelter 
If belongings were thrown away, and if so, what belongings;
Whether property is stored or returned
Whether anyone is arrested;
Whether anyone was sent to the hospital;
Whether anyone was injured;
How long an encampment has been present at the targeted location.

As the new Encampment Management Abatement Plan is enacted, this dataset will also omit all vehicle towings. 

To better contextualize the data that laid the foundation for this map, we were guided by six months of research, on-the-ground reporting, and interviews with unhoused people and others who have been present during encampment closures.

While this data is lacking, it is important to note that this dataset is often the only existing public record of these actions happening - there are often no photos, videos, or testimonies of encampment closures. 

Data processing

To make this map, we utilized the following software: 
VSCode 
QGIS
Mapbox
Google API
OpenStreetMaps API
Google Earth
Claude

These are our data processing steps:

Step one: downloading

The most recent data has been downloaded from the City of Oakland Data portal, and we are regularly checking to make sure that it has not been updated. 

Step two: cleaning

The location strings are cleaned and made to follow a uniform street format. The locations are separated into “betweens” and “others.” The “betweens” are location strings that describe a street segment between two intersections — for example, “MLK Between 45th and 46th.” This would be cleaned into “Martin Luther King Jr. Way between 45th St and 46th St.” 

Then, each “between” is turned from a street segment into two intersection points — for example, "Martin Luther King Jr. Way and 45th St” and “Martin Luther King Jr. Way and 46th St.” 

Each of these intersections is run through a Google API, which searches for that intersection and returns a lat / long pair. Then, the OSM Roads network is utilized to draw a road segment between these two coordinate points. Finally, those lines are exported into QGIS and cleaned manually. 

For the locations that are not road segments — i.e. “Mosswood Park” or “Lake Merritt” — those locations were separated out from the data set, and we utilized Google Earth to manually draw the appropriate polygons. 

Step three: sweeps vs. postings

In order to aggregate the postings into operations, they are first clumped geographically using a DBSCAN clustering algorithm. This assigns each posting a location cluster id — numbers 1–55. Then, within each group, the postings are grouped according to time - they are grouped together if they are on the same or immediately sequential (excluding holidays and weekends) dates. Each posting is assigned a temporal event id, which starts at one and runs up to one hundred. The two ids are combined to create an operation_id: XX_XX. There were 560 unique operation cluster ids. 

We then utilized our team and a couple of volunteers to manually verify each of these operations. Doing this, we found small errors, such as when the blocks were too long and therefore too far apart to be clustered together even when they should have been, or when sweeps could not have been geographically continuous due to large infrastructure, such as bridges, even though they were only a few meters apart.extremely close geographically. After this process, there were 719 unique operations. 

Step four: mapping

We decided on a color and font scheme to mimic old newspapers from the East Bay. We utilized MapBox Monochrome as the basemap. All polygons and lines were hand-verified. There is a level of assumption about each polygon. Many locations overlap, as the sections themselves overlap. We used GitHub to host our website. 
